chore(blog): add release notes for 2.5.0 release (#959)
asyncapi/website: pages/blog/release-notes-2.5.0.md

      - name: "kind:remote"
        description: "This server is a remote server. Not exposed by the application"
      - name: "visibility:private"
        description: "This resource is private and only available to certain users"  
  mtls-connections:
    url: test.mykafkacluster.org:28092
    protocol: kafka-secure
    description: Test broker secured with X509
    security:
      - certs: []
    tags:
      - name: "env:test-mtls"
        description: "This environment is meant for running internal tests through mtls"
      - name: "kind:remote"
        description: "This server is a remote server. Not exposed by the application"
      - name: "visibility:private"
        description: "This resource is private and only available to certain users"
channels: {}
```

This new feature was contributed by [Sergio Moya](https://github.com/smoya). For more detail, see [Sergio's `/spec #809` pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/809) and the [GitHub issue where Sergio's change was discussed](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/654).

## Added missing IBMMQ Operation Binding

> content placeholder

Author: @magicmatatjahu can I ask to provide description of your contribution provided in https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/840 and https://github.com/asyncapi/bindings/pull/149? Thanks a lot!

Reviewer: I'm not a native speaker, but I would like to describe it in this way:

> We noted that in the case of bindings `ibmmq` we overlooked and did not define a definition for `Operation Bindings Object`. In new specification version the given definition is empty but to be consistent with the rest of the bindings it is reserved for future definition/values.

Could it be?

Author: Thanks. I've run it through the [Grammarly](https://grammarly.com/) which provided the final grammatically correct form. Here is the final result: https://github.com/asyncapi/website/pull/959/files#diff-1e152584ce16f037dccd187a75e11a4dfa94d6414ed40a90cbfdbff9af4cc210R101

Google Cloud Pub/Sub, thanks to [Jeremy Whitlock](https://github.com/whitlockjc). For more details, check out this [pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/836) and the [binding definition](https://github.com/asyncapi/bindings/tree/master/googlepubsub).

## Clarifications

Here are notable clarifications that got into the AsyncAPI 2.5.0 release. Here is the list of notable clarifications that may have an impact on the tooling authors:

**ChannelItem.$ref resolution rules**

All references of `MUST be in the format of a URL` sentence have been substituted with `This MUST be in the form of an absolute URL`.
The meaning of `absolute URL` is now defined by [RFC3986, section 4.3](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-4.3).

**Clarification around URL resolution rules**

The resolution rules around `ChannelItem.$ref` field were not clearly defined. AsyncAPI 2.5.0 comes with explicit clarification that the resolution is done as defined by the [JSON Reference](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03).

## Tooling support

The following official AsyncAPI tools are already updated to support the 2.5.0 specification version:

> - JSON Schema that supports validation of AsyncAPI documents is updated in [this](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas) repository. Also **@asyncapi/specs** package has been updated on NPM to version `3.2.0`, and it contains the JSON Schema document for AsyncAPI Spec 2.5.0.

Author: ```suggestion
- JSON Schema that supports validation of AsyncAPI documents is updated in our [specification JSON schema repository](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas). We updated the **@asyncapi/specs** package on NPM to version `3.2`, containing the JSON Schema document for AsyncAPI Spec 2.5.0.
```

- [JavaScript Parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/) can be used to parse and validate 2.5.0 documents. Upgraded to `the 1.17.0` version.
- [AsyncAPI React Component](https://github.com/asyncapi/asyncapi-react) allows you to render and validate the documentation of your asynchronous API provided in the AsyncAPI specification format. Upgraded to the `v1.0.0-next.43` version.
- [HTML template](https://github.com/asyncapi/html-template) uses the latest **@asyncapi/react-component** package. Upgraded to the `0.26.0` version.
- [JavaScript Converter](https://github.com/asyncapi/converter-js/) enables conversion from any AsyncAPI version into the 2.5.0 version of the spec. Upgraded to the `1.1.0` version.

> - [Generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/) uses the latest @asyncapi/parser package, so while generating output, it can validate 2.5.0 documents. Upgraded to the `1.10.0` version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/) uses the latest @asyncapi/parser package, so while generating output, it can validate 2.5.0 documents. Upgraded to the `1.10.0` version.
- [Modelina](https://github.com/asyncapi/modelina/) can be used to generate typed models. Upgraded to the `1.0.0-next.11` version.
```

Reviewer 3: @jonaslagoni fyi if we make this change, we won't be able to publish release notes before @alequetzalli time zone is up

Reviewer 2: How come? 🤔

Reviewer 2: Ahh, only code owner for markdown files 😆

Reviewer: Also `generator` is released as `1.9.12` not `1.10.0` cc @derberg

Reviewer 3: oh crap, sorry

@char0n we need update, so please take suggestions from @jonaslagoni and update info about generator as @magicmatatjahu wrote

Reviewer 2: There are so many tools missing from the list that are still in the process of being updated. I don't see any benefit in only highlighting a small section of the tools. It feels rushed which I don't think is good 😅 But of course the alternative is that we give tools a couple of days before releasing the release notes. Which also is sub-optimal.

We could list all the tools that are in-progress of being updated and their PRs? 🤔

Reviewer 2: Studio and CLI is also missing.

Reviewer: Studio is highlighted under list :)

Reviewer 3: > There are so many tools missing from the list that are still in the process of being updated

which ones?

Reviewer: For CLI https://github.com/asyncapi/cli/releases/tag/v0.25.0

Reviewer 2: > Studio is highlighted under list :)

Ahh, just hiding in the end 😆 I even checked for it before writing...

Reviewer 2: @derberg we also have:
- Bundler https://github.com/asyncapi/bundler/releases/tag/v0.2.3
- Cupid https://github.com/asyncapi/cupid/releases/tag/v0.6.20
- Optimizer https://github.com/asyncapi/optimizer/releases/tag/v0.1.11
- Glee https://github.com/asyncapi/glee/releases/tag/v0.10.23

and so on, we got a lot of tools that basically just need to have their parser updated.

Diff had it's dependency updated as a `chore` not sure what that's about https://github.com/asyncapi/diff/pull/117 should have been a `fix` I think.

Reviewer 2: Server API https://github.com/asyncapi/server-api/releases/tag/v0.11.0

Reviewer 3: > Diff had it's dependency updated as a chore not sure what that's about https://github.com/asyncapi/diff/pull/117 should have been a fix I think.

diff do not use parser, it is there only in devdependencies for testing

Reviewer 2: > diff do not use parser, it is there only in devdependencies for testing

Ahh right, makes sense 👍

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we should include spectral here if it's updated in time see https://github.com/stoplightio/spectral/pull/2292

cc @magicmatatjahu

Reviewer: Spectral is not our tool and also Spectral is releasing one time per day, so I don't think so that we should wait for it and also write about it. It's my opinion, maybe @derberg or @fmvilas will have another.

Reviewer 3: yeah, it is sad it is outside our org and releases

spectral is not our, but asyncapi ruleset is pretty important for community, would be nice to have it included...but yeah, waiting just for it doesn't make sense imho

Reviewer 3: @char0n maybe we can mention that asyncapi ruleset will soon be released and link to the pr?

Reviewer: I'm fine with this :) 🚀

Author: @derberg see no problem with it. Can you provide suggestion of the change?

Reviewer 3: @char0n have a look https://github.com/asyncapi/website/pull/959/files#r983484253

Author: suggestion merged. Thanks!

      - certs: []
    tags:
      - name: "env:test-mtls"
        description: "This environment is meant for running internal tests through mtls"
      - name: "kind:remote"
        description: "This server is a remote server. Not exposed by the application"
      - name: "visibility:private"
        description: "This resource is private and only available to certain users"
channels: {}
```

This new feature was contributed by [Sergio Moya](https://github.com/smoya). For more detail, see [Sergio's `/spec #809` pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/809) and the [GitHub issue where Sergio's change was discussed](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/654).

## Added missing IBM MQ Operation Binding

We noticed that we overlooked and did not define Operation Bindings Object in the case of IBM MQ. 
In AsyncAPI 2.5.0, the definition is empty, but its name is reserved for future use to be consistent with the rest of the bindings.

This change was contributed by [Maciej Urbańczyk](https://github.com/magicmatatjahu). For more detail, see [Maciej's `/spec #840` pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/840).

## Added new Google Cloud Pub/Sub Bindings

> `content placeholder`

Author: @whitlockjc can you please provide a description of your contribution? I'll incorporate your description into this release blog article.

## Tooling support

The following official AsyncAPI tools are already updated to support the 2.5.0 specification version:
- JSON Schema that supports validation of AsyncAPI documents is updated in our [specification JSON schema repository](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas). We updated the **@asyncapi/specs** package on NPM to version `3.2`, containing the JSON Schema document for AsyncAPI Spec 2.5.0.
- [JavaScript Parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/) can be used to parse and validate 2.5.0 documents. Upgraded to `the 1.17.0` version.
- [AsyncAPI React Component](https://github.com/asyncapi/asyncapi-react) allows you to render and validate the documentation of your asynchronous API provided in the AsyncAPI specification format. Upgraded to the `v1.0.0-next.43` version.
- [HTML template](https://github.com/asyncapi/html-template) uses the latest **@asyncapi/react-component** package. Upgraded to the `0.26.0` version.
- [JavaScript Converter](https://github.com/asyncapi/converter-js/) enables conversion from any AsyncAPI version into the 2.5.0 version of the spec. Upgraded to the `1.1.0` version.

> - [Generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/) uses the latest @asyncapi/parser package, so while generating output, it can validate 2.5.0 documents. Upgraded to the `1.10.0` version.

Author: ```suggestion
- [Generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/) uses the latest @asyncapi/parser package, so while generating output, it can validate 2.5.0 documents. Upgraded to the `1.9.12` version.
```

- [Modelina](https://github.com/asyncapi/modelina/) can be used to generate typed models. Upgraded to the `1.0.0-next.11` version.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Bundler](https://github.com/asyncapi/bundler) can be used to generate typed models. Upgraded to the `0.2.3` version.
- [Cupid](https://github.com/asyncapi/cupid) can be used to generate typed models. Upgraded to the `0.6.20` version.
- [Optimizer](https://github.com/asyncapi/optimizer) can be used to generate typed models. Upgraded to the `0.1.11` version.
- [Glee](https://github.com/asyncapi/glee) can be used to generate typed models. Upgraded to the `0.10.23` version.
- [Spectral AsyncAPI Ruleset](https://meta.stoplight.io/docs/spectral/1e63ffd0220f3-async-api-rules) that you can use for lining of AsyncAPI documents will be released soon. [The pull request](https://github.com/stoplightio/spectral/pull/2292) is ready.
```

---
title: AsyncAPI Spec 2.5.0 Release Notes
date: 2022-09-29T16:41:00+01:00
type: Communication
tags:
  - Specification
  - Release Notes
cover: /img/posts/release-notes-2.5.0/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Vladimír Gorej
    photo: /img/avatars/char0n.webp
    link: https://twitter.com/vladimirgorej
    byline: Open Source Software Engineer, OSS contributor, author and content creator.

> excerpt: "AsyncAPI 2.5 is now released. This brings really helpful additions, such as extended Server Variables reusability, and many clarifications"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
excerpt: "The release of AsyncAPI 2.5 brings helpful additions, such as extended Server Variables reusability and many clarifications."
```

Never _start_ or _end_ a sentence with an **antecedent** (.ie. `this`) because it's grammatically undefined what `this` references.

featured: true
---

The new version of the AsyncAPI specification - 2.5.0 - is now available.

> This is a minor release, and it doesn't bring any breaking changes. You can switch to it by modifying the following value in your AsyncAPI file `asyncapi: '2.4.0'` into `asyncapi: '2.5.0'`

## Server Variables can be now referenced from inside the Server Object 

> Previous AsyncAPI 2.4.0 release came with support of [defining Server Variable Objects as reusable components](https://www.asyncapi.com/blog/release-notes-2.4.0#server-variables-can-be-now-referenced-from-components).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Previous AsyncAPI 2.4.0 release came with the support of [defining Server Variable Objects as reusable components](https://www.asyncapi.com/blog/release-notes-2.4.0#server-variables-can-be-now-referenced-from-components).
```

> Unfortunately AsyncAPI 2.4.0 doesn't allow to reference reusable server variable objects from within the `Server Object`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, AsyncAPI 2.4.0 doesn't allow referencing reusable _server variable objects_ from within the `Server Object`.
```

> So we ended up in a situation that reusable server variable objects can be defined, but they actually cannot be reused.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
So we ended up in a situation where reusable server variable objects can be defined but cannot be reused.
```

> AsyncAPI 2.5.0 remedies this deficiency by allowing to use `Reference Object` whenever `Server Variable Object` can be used inside `Server.variables` field.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
AsyncAPI 2.5.0 remedies this deficiency by allowing the use of `Reference Object`s whenever `Server Variable Object`s can be used inside the `Server.variables` field.
```

> Following example is now fully compliant with the specification:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following example is now fully compliant with the updated specification:
```

```yaml
asyncapi: 2.5.0
servers:
  development:
    $ref: '#/components/servers/myserver'
  production:
    $ref: '#/components/servers/myserver'
components:
  servers:
    myserver:
      url: "{stage}.my-server.com:{port}"
      protocol: ws
      variables:
        stage:
          $ref: "#/components/serverVariables/stage"
        port:
          $ref: "#/components/serverVariables/port"
  serverVariables:
    stage:
      default: dev
    port:
      enum: [5000, 6000]
      default: 5000
```

> This new feature was contributed by [Vladimír Gorej](https://github.com/char0n). For more detail, see [Vladimír's `/spec #776` pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/776) and the [GitHub issue where Vladimír's change to `serverVariables ` was discussed](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/775).

Reviewer 4: *chef kiss* 👨‍🍳  on accessibility here

## Decorating Server Object with tags

> Tags are used to categorize or group resources. 2.5.0 introduces support for defining tags at Server level, which can be used for many use cases like grouping servers by their features: environment name, cluster name, visibility, owner, etc.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Tags categorize or group resources. 2.5.0 introduces support for defining tags at the Server level, which can be used for many use cases such as grouping servers by their features: environment name, cluster name, visibility, owner, etc.
```

For example:

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.5.0'
info:
  title: Streetlights Kafka API
  version: '1.0.0'
servers:
  scram-connections:
    url: test.mykafkacluster.org:18092
    protocol: kafka-secure
    description: Test broker secured with scramSha256
    security:
      - saslScram: []
    tags:
      - name: "env:test-scram"

>         description: "This environment is meant for running internal tests through scramSha256"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        description: "This environment is for running internal tests through scramSha256"
```

      - name: "kind:remote"
        description: "This server is a remote server. Not exposed by the application"
      - name: "visibility:private"
        description: "This resource is private and only available to certain users"  
  mtls-connections:
    url: test.mykafkacluster.org:28092
    protocol: kafka-secure
    description: Test broker secured with X509
    security:
      - certs: []
    tags:
      - name: "env:test-mtls"

>         description: "This environment is meant for running internal tests through mtls"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        description: "This environment is for running internal tests through mTLS"
```

In debugging messages, conciseness matters 300% more ✌🏽

      - name: "kind:remote"
        description: "This server is a remote server. Not exposed by the application"
      - name: "visibility:private"
        description: "This resource is private and only available to certain users"
channels: {}
```

This new feature was contributed by [Sergio Moya](https://github.com/smoya). For more detail, see [Sergio's `/spec #809` pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/809) and the [GitHub issue where Sergio's change was discussed](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/654).

## Added missing IBM MQ Operation Binding

> We noticed that we overlooked and did not define Operation Bindings Object in the case of IBM MQ. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We noticed that we overlooked and did not define the Operation Bindings Object in the case of IBM MQ. 
```

In AsyncAPI 2.5.0, the definition is empty, but its name is reserved for future use to be consistent with the rest of the bindings.

This change was contributed by [Maciej Urbańczyk](https://github.com/magicmatatjahu). For more detail, see [Maciej's `/spec #840` pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/840).

## Added new Google Cloud Pub/Sub Bindings

The specification is now extended to support another custom protocol through the bindings feature:

> Google Cloud Pub/Sub, thanks to [Jeremy Whitlock](https://github.com/whitlockjc). For more details, check out this [pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/836) and [binding definition](https://github.com/asyncapi/bindings/tree/master/googlepubsub).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Google Cloud Pub/Sub, thanks to [Jeremy Whitlock](https://github.com/whitlockjc). For more details, check out this [pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/836) and the [binding definition](https://github.com/asyncapi/bindings/tree/master/googlepubsub).
```

## Clarifications

> Here are notable clarifications that got into AsyncAPI 2.5.0 release. Here is the list of notable clarifications that may have
> impact on the tooling authors:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Here are notable clarifications that got into the AsyncAPI 2.5.0 release. Here is the list of notable clarifications that may have an impact on the tooling authors:
```

**ChannelItem.$ref resolution rules**

All references of `MUST be in the format of a URL` sentence have been substituted with `This MUST be in the form of an absolute URL`.
The meaning of `absolute URL` is now defined by [RFC3986, section 4.3](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-4.3).

**Clarification around URL resolution rules**

> The resolution rules around `ChannelItem.$ref` field were not clearly defined. AsyncAPI 2.5.0 comes with explicit clarification
> that the resolution is done as defined by the [JSON Reference](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The resolution rules around `ChannelItem.$ref` field were not clearly defined. AsyncAPI 2.5.0 comes with explicit clarification that the resolution is done as defined by the [JSON Reference](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03).
```

## Tooling support

> The following official AsyncAPI tools are already updated to support 2.5.0 version of the specification:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following official AsyncAPI tools are already updated to support the 2.5.0 specification version:
```

> - JSON Schema that supports validation of AsyncAPI documents is updated in [this](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas) repository. Also **@asyncapi/specs** package has been updated on NPM to version `3.2.0`, and it contains the JSON Schema document for AsyncAPI Spec 2.5.0.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [JSON Schema that supports validation of AsyncAPI documents is updated in our [specification JSON schema repository](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas). We updated the **@asyncapi/specs** package on NPM to version `3.2`, containing the JSON Schema document for AsyncAPI Spec 2.5.0.
```
For **accessibility**, all anchor link text MUST include descriptive text detailing where the URL leads. IOW, you should **not** have anchor text such as the following: 
- this
- read more
- click here
- etc.

Author: ACKN. 

Isn't there a redundant `[` char at the start of your suggestion?

Reviewer 4: you can edit commit suggestions before you accept and push them ;)

Author: @alequetzalli I don't think there is a way to edit somebody's else suggestion. I'll copy your suggestion into my own one and commit it without a typo (if that's OK with you).

Author: Resolving in favor of: https://github.com/asyncapi/website/pull/959/files#r982781160

Reviewer 4: Thats weird, I know I've done it before... im afk running an errand now, when I come back I can fix my commit suggestion if its still needed

Author: no action needed anymore, thanks

> - [JavaScript Parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/) can be used to parse and validate 2.5.0 documents. Upgrade to `1.17.0` version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [JavaScript Parser](https://github.com/asyncapi/parser-js/) can be used to parse and validate 2.5.0 documents. Upgraded to `the 1.17.0` version.
```

> - [AsyncAPI React Component](https://github.com/asyncapi/asyncapi-react) allows you to render the documentation of your asynchronous API provided in the AsyncAPI specification format and validate this specification. Upgrade to `v1.0.0-next.43` version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [AsyncAPI React Component](https://github.com/asyncapi/asyncapi-react) allows you to render and validate the documentation of your asynchronous API provided in the AsyncAPI specification format. Upgraded to the `v1.0.0-next.43` version.
```

> - [HTML template](https://github.com/asyncapi/html-template) uses the latest **@asyncapi/react-component** package. Upgrade to `0.26.0` version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [HTML template](https://github.com/asyncapi/html-template) uses the latest **@asyncapi/react-component** package. Upgraded to the `0.26.0` version.
```

> - [JavaScript Converter](https://github.com/asyncapi/converter-js/) enables conversion from any AsyncAPI version into the 2.5.0 version of the spec. Upgrade to `1.1.0` version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [JavaScript Converter](https://github.com/asyncapi/converter-js/) enables conversion from any AsyncAPI version into the 2.5.0 version of the spec. Upgraded to the `1.1.0` version.
```

> - [Generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/) uses the latest @asyncapi/parser package, so while generating output, it can validate 2.5.0 documents. Upgrade to `1.10.0` version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Generator](https://github.com/asyncapi/generator/) uses the latest @asyncapi/parser package, so while generating output, it can validate 2.5.0 documents. Upgraded to the `1.10.0` version.
```

> Last but not least is the AsyncAPI Studio. [Check out the Studio with this example](https://studio.asyncapi.com/?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/asyncapi/spec/v2.5.0/examples/websocket-gemini.yml).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Last but not least comes AsyncAPI Studio. [Check out AsyncAPI Studio with this YAML example](https://studio.asyncapi.com/?url=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/asyncapi/spec/v2.5.0/examples/websocket-gemini.yml).
```

## Look ahead

> We aim to have a regular cadence of releases of the AsyncAPI specification, four times a year. For more information about when to expect future releases, you can see our [release process document](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/blob/master/RELEASE_PROCESS.md#release-cadence).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We aim to have a quarterly cadence of releases of the AsyncAPI specification. For more information about when to expect future releases, you can see our [release process document](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/blob/master/RELEASE_PROCESS.md#release-cadence).
```

Can we say `quarterly` instead? The current wording sounded strange and hard to follow.

> We're also working on the next major release of the AsyncAPI specification: 3.0.0. If you'd like to contribute, or just follow the discussions, you can see [Work on 3.0 release issue](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/691).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We're also working on the next major release of the AsyncAPI specification: 3.0.0. If you'd like to contribute, or just follow the discussions, you can see [work on the 3.0 release issue](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/691).
```

AsyncAPI 2.5.0 remedies this deficiency by allowing to use `Reference Object` whenever `Server Variable Object` can be used inside `Server.variables` field.

Following example is now fully compliant with the specification:

```yaml
asyncapi: 2.4.0
servers:
  development:
    $ref: '#/components/servers/myserver'
  production:
    $ref: '#/components/servers/myserver'
components:
  servers:
    myserver:
      url: "{stage}.my-server.com:{port}"
      protocol: ws
      variables:
        stage:
          $ref: "#/components/serverVariables/stage"
        port:
          $ref: "#/components/serverVariables/port"
  serverVariables:
    stage:
      default: dev
    port:
      enum: [5000, 6000]
      default: 5000
```

This new feature was contributed by [Vladimír Gorej](https://github.com/char0n). For more detail, see [Vladimír's `/spec #776` pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/776) and the [GitHub issue where Vladimír's change to `serverVariables ` was discussed](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/775).

## Decorating Server Object with tags

> placeholder for description

Author: @smoya can I ask you to provide section describing your contribution? Thanks!

Reviewer 5: Here we go:

Tags are used to categorize or group resources. 2.5.0 introduces support for defining tags at Server level, which can be used for many use cases like grouping servers by their features: environment name, cluster name, visibility, owner, etc.

For example:

```yaml
asyncapi: '2.5.0'
info:
  title: Streetlights Kafka API
  version: '1.0.0'
servers:
  scram-connections:
    url: test.mykafkacluster.org:18092
    protocol: kafka-secure
    description: Test broker secured with scramSha256
    security:
      - saslScram: []
    tags:
      - name: "env:test-scram"
        description: "This environment is meant for running internal tests through scramSha256"
      - name: "kind:remote"
        description: "This server is a remote server. Not exposed by the application"
      - name: "visibility:private"
        description: "This resource is private and only available to certain users"  
  mtls-connections:
    url: test.mykafkacluster.org:28092
    protocol: kafka-secure
    description: Test broker secured with X509
    security:
      - certs: []
    tags:
      - name: "env:test-mtls"
        description: "This environment is meant for running internal tests through mtls"
      - name: "kind:remote"
        description: "This server is a remote server. Not exposed by the application"
      - name: "visibility:private"
        description: "This resource is private and only available to certain users"
channels: {}
```

This new feature was contributed by [Sergio Moya](https://github.com/smoya). For more detail, see [Sergio's /spec #809 pull request](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/pull/809) and the [Github issue where Sergio's change to was discussed](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec/issues/654).

Author: Incorporated into draft blog post. Thank you!

## Clarifications

Here are notable clarifications that got into AsyncAPI 2.5.0 release. Here is the list of notable clarifications that may have
impact on the tooling authors:

**ChannelItem.$ref resolution rules**

All references of `MUST be in the format of a URL` sentence have been substituted with `This MUST be in the form of an absolute URL`.
The meaning of `absolute URL` is now defined by [RFC3986, section 4.3](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-4.3).

**Clarification around URL resolution rules**

The resolution rules around `ChannelItem.$ref` field were not clearly defined. AsyncAPI 2.5.0 comes with explicit clarification
that the resolution is done as defined by the [JSON Reference](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-pbryan-zyp-json-ref-03).

## Tooling support

The following official AsyncAPI tools are already updated to support 2.5.0 version of the specification:

> - JSON Schema that supports validation of AsyncAPI documents is updated in [this](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas) repository. Also **@asyncapi/specs** package has been updated on NPM to version `<version>`, and it contains the 2.4.0 JSON Schema.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- JSON Schema that supports validation of AsyncAPI documents is updated in [this](https://github.com/asyncapi/spec-json-schemas) repository. Also **@asyncapi/specs** package has been updated on NPM to version `<version>`, and it contains the JSON Schema document for AsyncAPI Spec 2.5.0.
```
